>> Richard Feldman: So
this concludes the workshop.
>> [APPLAUSE]
>> Richard Feldman: We just have one more
section, just a little bit of like, if you
wanna do a little further reading type of
stuff, but congratulations, you made it.
If there's one thing that you
take away from this course,
I think this is maybe the most
conceptually useful one.
Is just that memory is basically
a gigantic array of bytes.
They're all these ones and zeros, and
you can choose to interpret
them however you want.
As the C programmers or other low level
languages, not only can you interpret
these however you want, but as we've seen,
there are actually specific benefits.
Especially when it comes to performance
of making use of that understanding of
the gigantic array of bytes,
concept of memory.
Granted, we are doing manual memory
management there's the malloc and free and
memory on the stack and buffer overruns
and reading into garbage memory and
all this initialized stuff.
There's a lot of performance to be had,
but also a ton a ton of foot guns.
If you've ever thought pointers were hard,
hopefully the fact that we just
talked about memory addresses and
integers a lot [LAUGH] will make
that at least a little bit easier.
But if anyone ever says pointer,
and you're like, what's a pointer?
It's a memory address.
It's an integer that refers to where
that gigantic array of bytes are we.
We talked about what is C,
what is it used for?
It's one of the top 10 most
popular programming languages, and
now you hopefully have a more
visceral sense of why, if you really,
really want build an operating system
where performance is really critical.
A database,
a programming language compiler, or
a programming language runtime,
all of these things are things that
can benefit from having all of
the safety rails removed so
that you can just make things as
optimized as fast as you possibly can.
We talked about where C comes from,
[LAUGH] back in the PDP-11 days,
just one step removed from punch cards,
working on a teletype,
which is a big ergonomics
improvement compared to punch cards.
This is what they built this language in.
And everything we did today is just an
evolution of the same language that they
made in 1972 on that teletype with this
extremely limited amount of system
resources.
Now we're working on machines that are
multiple orders of magnitude more powerful
than this.
Why is C popular?
Basically performance.
I mean, this is the real thing.
C++, you can get the same
levels of performance.
It is possible.
Same thing with Rust, same thing with JAI,
and Odin and Zig and all those.
But it is much simpler than C++ and
although there are new
competing alternatives, they're much
newer and less established than C.
C is 50 plus years old, Zig is,
I don't know, five, maybe 10 years old,
something like that.
And yet, despite this, in the local
static HTTP server Perf Olympics,
what we've just built in the course
of this workshop with no standard.
No dependencies other than the standard
library was able to outcompete these
things that have been worked on way
more than just this little workshop, and
also which have millions in some
cases of downloads and usage.
And this is again with my silly little
benchmark of [LAUGH] frontendmasters.com.
But you can reproduce
this locally if you want.
Okay, yeah, we talked about portable
assembly and how it's like, well, I mean,
yes, when it comes to the instructions
we're compiling to, but
there are still library
differences with the OS.
So it's not like, it's all just complete
roses, and you can just write your .c file
and then just ship it out the door, and
you don't have to think about anything.
But at the same time, we did also look
at some actual non portable assembly and
hopefully we can all agree that for
all of its problems,
C is a significant ergonomics upgrade
over all of that level of verbosity.
Zero overhead programming, pretty much
true unless you wanna really micromanage
your registers like an assembly language.
But honestly, the compilers do tend
to do a very good job of that.
Almost zero safety programming.
I mean, we had this slide at
the beginning of the workshop.
Yeah, I remember there were
some questions about, hey,
what does that mean in
terms of memory safety?
Well, now we've seen a bunch of examples
of specifically what memory unsafety
means, and all of the fun
consequences that can come from that.
And it is also the language that other
languages use to talk to each other.
I mentioned at the very beginning that we
would just talk very briefly about how you
could use this if you are,
a JavaScript programmer, and
you wanna get some C into
your JavaScript code.
This is how you would do this.
So one of the reasons that I wanted to
make sure that we were actually doing some
like reading docs of C APIs is
that if you go to this website,
you can actually learn how to
build Node.js add-ons in C.
In other words, you can take your Node.js
program and you can literally say,
I want to call a little bit of C code
that I've written from my Node.js code.
This will tell you how to do that,
and it's gonna be using exactly the same
styles of docs and the types and
all of that type of stuff that
we learned about in this course.
So if you want to go out and build your
own Node.js add ons, let's say you're
writing something like, I just really need
some really high performance section here.
If I could make this one part of my
NodeJs server a little bit faster,
this is a way you can do that.
You can just bust out into C and do that.
Or if you're like, I wanna write it in
Rust, you could use C as an intermediary,
because the Node.js API
works in terms of C.
They actually made their
library compatible with C++,
but C++ is a superset of C.
So anything that works in C++,
you can also do in C.
I've actually gotten paid at work to
write a Node.js add-on [LAUGH] before.
So I can confirm that this
definitely works with just C,
you don't need to know C to use this.
And essentially, this is a way that you
can just speed up your your Node.js
programs, or if you have some particular C
library that you wanna use, that you wanna
really get in there, and nobody's made a
wrapper for that, you can totally do that.
And in fact,
you can even then distribute it on NPM.
I did wanna note that if you're trying
to get into a large C or C++ code base,
such as like a Postgres or an operating
system or something like that,
building it can be
a significant challenge.
So for this course, we're dealing with
one .c file, building it not difficult.
If you're dealing with a gigantic C
code base or C++ code base, building it,
far from trivial.
Fortunately, I do have a recommendation
of how to learn about how to build
these things.
Andrew Kelley, who created Zig,
gave this awesome talk called how
to build software from source.
And depending on what programming
language you're used to using,
you might think that's easy.
Why would you give
a whole talk about that?
It's not so easy when you're talking
about large C and C++ projects.
But if you watch this talk, he gives a lot
of really, really good practical tips for
how to actually configure and then
build these large projects from source.
This is from the conference
software you can love in 2023.
And here is a link if you
wanna go check that out.
I also wanted to plug this book.
This is a very famous book.
I actually bought on eBay a copy.
This is a picture of someone else's book.
But if you ever hear what K&R,
this is the book they're talking about.
So this is Brian Curnahan and
Dennis Ritchie.
So Dennis Ritchie was a creative C, and
then Brian is a very famous C user and
writer and author and stuff like that.
This is the first edition,
which I did wanna make sure and
get cuz it has some fun little anecdotes
in here about really old hardware stuff
that aren't really applicable anymore.
But this is also just kind of
a seminal it's one of the classic
books that people talk about,
right up there with structure and
interpretation of computer programs
as just even beyond the C stuff.
It's also got a lot of advice
about philosophies around around
writing programming, and
as we seen in this workshop, philosophies
around writing C code are pretty different
from best practices in other languages.
So I recommend giving it a read,
if for no other reason, then it's just
the perspective is pretty different
than what you're probably used to.
If you wanna get further down
the performance optimization rabbit hole,
I have two recommendations.
One is Agner Foggs website, agner.org I
wanted to include a screenshot of this
with the pale green and everything.
He's also got a little animated plane that
flies across when you go to the homepage
and the plane has a little banner
behind it that says I hate animations.
That's kind of the vibe [LAUGH]
that we're dealing with here.
The information is incredibly,
incredibly good.
It's also pretty dense.
I personally have read through
the optimizing software in C++ one.
Some of it in C++ specific, but
a whole lot of it is really,
really just like low level hardware.
Like here's what your CPU is doing,
here are some tips and tricks.
Very, very, very detailed, pretty dense,
but if you really wanna go down the rabbit
hole on this stuff, and you thought that
some of the crazy tricks that we did at
the end of a part six were fun, you can
find more stuff like that at this website.
If you really wanna go all the way
down the rabbit hole, Casey Muratore,
who you might have seen on
like the primogen stream.
He's a frequent guest on there.
He is an old school game
engine programmer, and
he made this unbelievably detailed course
called performance aware programming.
It is many, many, many hours,
I've watched through all that.
I don't think I'm quite
caught up right now.
But it goes into things like the very
beginning of the course is you go through
and build a simulator for
a really old CPU.
So you can actually see literally what is
the CPU doing when it gets the ones and
zeros in.
We're gonna write software that
deals with those ones and zeros and
simulates actually doing
what the CPU does.
So you really can absolutely
understand what all is going on.
And then from there, he's like, that was
an old school CPU that was much simpler.
Let's talk about modern CPUs.
And he just goes through all the different
features that modern CPUs have added and
all the complexities they've added.
There's also a cool moment at the
beginning of the course where he shows you
a Python program and is like,
I can make this, what was it like?
10,000 times faster in C or
something like that?
And he actually goes through a debugger
and steps into showing you all the layers
of overhead that Python is adding,
and how if you just rewrite it in C,
you can get it to be [LAUGH] massively,
massively faster.
Really, really cool stuff,
extremely detailed, not for
the faint of heart, but definitely,
highly recommend that check this out
if you're interested in really going
down the performance rabbit hole.
And I also wanted to mention,
yeah, there was a question?
>> Speaker 2: Just on a similar vein,
Mishko Avery, the creator of Angular,
has a course on Frontend Masters
called Bare Metal JavaScript.
And he builds a CPU register and-.
>> Richard Feldman: Nice.
>> Speaker 2: Memory and
all that kind of stuff from scratch.
So, something to check out if
you're already on Frontend Masters.
>> Richard Feldman: There you go.
Yeah, nice.
>> Speaker 3: Does C-sharp
have any relation here?
>> Richard Feldman: Does C-sharp
have a relation here?
Only in name, really.
So C-sharp is basically,
how do I say this?
Java came out and
then C-sharp came out and
then people were like,
this looks a lot like Java.
Other than the name C, which I'm
sure was like a pun on C and C++,
it almost has nothing in common with C and
a lot, a lot in common with Java.
That's, I guess, a quick summary of it.
[LAUGH] Yeah.
Yeah, cool.
So some low overhead C alternatives.
We mentioned a couple of these,
like C++ definitely way off
the complexity into the spectrum,
probably the most complicated popular
language on the planet right now.
Russ, strong contender,
also extremely complicated language, but
has way more guarantees and a lot of
ergonomics benefits compared to C++.
Also has the benefit of not
having been created in 1980s so
[LAUGH] got to benefit from a lot
of advances in various things.
The D programming language
is also pretty old.
D is notable for like anytime you mention
C++ or Russ or Zig on Hacker News,
someone will be like, and D, what about D?
But it's just not like really
picking up as much steam.
It's been around for a long time.
It's very powerful, has a lot of things,
but it doesn't really seem,
if I'm being honest,
like it's gonna take off anytime soon.
Zig is definitely like having
a significant uptick in popularity by
basically being a reaction to these
sort of more complex C alternatives,
like C++ and Rust and D and then Odin and
JAI are two significantly less popular.
But also, kind of taking
the same basic approach of, yeah,
let's try to improve on C, but in a way
where we're not adding so much complexity.
JAI, I should mention, is a working name.
This is created by Jonathan Blow,
who's a friend of Casey Muratori and
a former collaborator, you might know
him as the creator of the really
popular games Braid and The Witness.
He's made this programming language.
JAI is specifically designed to be for
games, and
it's based on his frustrations with C++.
And it has some significant
differences between Zig and Odin, but
I haven't actually used it, so I can't
really comment on it in depth other than
to say that right now on
the simplest C alternatives,
definitely Zig of these three is
by far the most popular right now.
And time will tell how
those things shaken.
Also all of these low overhead
C Alternatives they all support C and
Rob just like most mainstream languages
do because C is the language that other
languages use talk to each
other as previously discussed.
Like I mentioned earlier, I mean C is
basically the most universal language in
the world today and now that you know C
you know the most universal in the world.
Thanks very much.
>> [APPLAUSE]